

--- Page 1 ---

Problem Set 1
Business 35137
Winter 2026
Due: January 23rd
1. Download the filegw.csvfrom canvas. This file contains monthly S&P 500 index returns
along with a series of predictors used to forecast the market. The S&P returns are offset by
one month from the predictors. In the first part of the problem set we will explore how well
we can forecast market returns using machine learning methods.
(a) For each of the predictors, regress the S&P 500 index returns on the predictor using the
full sample of data. Report theR 2s of these regressions. Next, evaluate the out-of-sample
performance of each predictor individually using an expanding sample of data starting in
1965. How do the out-of-sampleR 2s compare to the in-sampleR 2s? Interpret what this
means for the usefulness of these predictors in forecasting the market.
(b) Next, try the same expanding sample exercise but include all the predictors in a single
regression, compare the out-of-sampleR 2 here to those in part (a). Let’s now incorporate
a penalty term into the regression to counteract overfitting. Compute results for lasso,
ridge, and elastic net and use K-fold cross-validation to select the optimal penalty term.
Plot the out-of-sampleR 2 for each month for each of the three methods along with the
un-penalized regression. How do the methods compare? What does this tell us about the
predictability of market returns?
(c) Next, lets introduce some non-linearities into the model. Use the radial basis function ker-
nel to generate non-linear expansions of the underlying predictor set (use theRBFSampler
1

--- Page 2 ---

fromsklearn). Generate these features for a number of different feature counts. Plot the
out-of-sampleR 2 as a function of the number of features generated by the kernel. How
do the results compare to the linear models? Interpret the importance of the number of
features in the kernel expansion.
(d) To what extent do our results depend on the training window? Refit the model from part
(c) using a rolling window of 12, 36, 60, and 120 months. What do you observe about the
out-of-sampleR 2 as the training window changes?
(e) To what extent do our results depend on the cross-validation method? Refit the model
from part (c) using a range of folds for cross-validation. What do you observe about the
out-of-sampleR 2 as the number of folds changes?
(f) Next, download theFREDMD.csvfile from canvas. Incorporate the macroeconomic vari-
ables from this file into the model from part (c). How do the out-of-sampleR 2 change
when we include these variables? What does this tell us about the virtue of complexity?
(g) Lets compare the results from part (c) to some alternative methods. Compare the results
to theKernelRidge, principal components regression (combinePCAwith a standard re-
gression framework),PLSRegression, andGradientBoostingRegressormethods from
sklearn.
(h) Using everything you’ve learned up to this point, construct the best possible model for
forecasting the S&P 500 index returns. Explain the reasoning behind your choices.
2