

--- Page 1 ---

Problem Set 2
Business 35137
Winter 2026
Due: February 16
1. Download the filelargeml.pqfrom canvas. This file contains monthly returns for 500 large-cap
stocks along with a series of firm characteristics from openassetpricing. The returns are offset
by one month from the characteristics. This is a parquet file, which can be read intopandas
using thepd.read_parquetfunction.
(a) First, rank-sort each characteristic cross-sectionally each month and use the resulting
ranks to form a portfolio for each characteristic. Compute the annualized sharpe ratio for
each of these portfolios, plot these results and examine the characteristics of the best and
worst performing portfolios.
(b) Next, let’s form an alternative set of signals using machine learning using the following
methods:
i. OLS over the linear characteristics.
ii. lasso/ridge/elastic net over the linear characteristics.
iii. lasso/ridge/elastic net over the non-linear expansion formed byRBFSampler.
iv.PLSRegressionover the linear characteristics and the non-linear expansion.
v.GradientBoostingRegressor
Use the first 20 years of data to train the model, the next 12 years to select the tuning
parameters, and the remainder of the data to evaluate the models out-of-sample. Compute
an out-of-sampleR 2 for each method and interpret your results.
1

--- Page 2 ---

(c) Using the forecasts fom each model in part (b), form a portfolio corresponding to each
method. Over the same time period, compare the annualized Sharpe ratios for these ML
portfolios to the portfolios formed in part (a).
(d) Download the filesmallml.pqfrom canvas. This file contains 1000 small cap stocks, but
is otherwise formatted identically tolargeml.pq. Repeat (a), (b), and (c) and compare
and interpret the results.
(e) Finally, using everything you’ve learned up to this point, attempt to form a portfolio that
earns the highest possible Sharpe ratio out-of-sample. Explain the reasoning behind your
choices.
2

--- Page 3 ---

2. Download thelsret.csvfile from canvas. This contains long-short portfolio returns for each
of the characteristics used in openassetpricing.
(a) Using the returns fromlsret.csv, along with the portfolios you formed in 2.a and 2.d,
runPCAto estimate a set of latent factors from each set of portfolios. How many factors are
necessary to explain most the variation in the portfolios? Interpret the factors associated
with each set of portfolios and compare the Sharpe ratios across portfolio sets and factors.
(b) Using the portfolio returns fromlsret.csvintroduce an additional column corresponding
to an indicator (1) for all rows. Using all data prior to 2004 as your training/validation
sample, estimate lasso and ridge to “predict” the indicator. Use the estimated coefficients
to form a portfolio out-of-sample and report the annualized Sharpe ratio.
(c) Then for a range of latent factor counts, computePCAon the portfolio returns and repeat
the exercise from part (b) for each factor count. Plot the out-of-sample Sharpe ratio as a
function of the number of factors. Interpret these results.
(d) Repeat (b) and (c) for the large and small-cap portfolios. Compare the results across the
three sets of portfolios and interpret the differences.
(e) Finally, using everything you’ve learned up to this point and the portfolios fromlsret.csv
attempt to form a portfolio that earns the highest possible Sharpe ratio out-of-sample.
Explain the reasoning behind your choices.
3