

--- Page 1 ---

Machine Learning in Finance
Lecture 4: A Crash Course in Unsupervised Learning
J. Leland Bybee (University of Chicago)
February 2, 2026

--- Page 2 ---

Odds & Ends
▶ Project proposals due today!
▶ Questions?

--- Page 3 ---

Unsupervised Learning
1.Discover structure:
GivenX 1, ...,X n, find some structure/groups in the data.

--- Page 4 ---

Unsupervised Learning


--- Page 5 ---

Unsupervised Learning


--- Page 6 ---

Unsupervised Learning


--- Page 7 ---

Unsupervised Learning


--- Page 8 ---

Outline
1. Clustering
▶ K-means (& K-Medoids)
▶ Hierarchical clustering
2. Model-based methods
▶ Gaussian mixture models (GMM)
▶ Expectation Maximization (EM)
▶ Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
▶ Bayesian methods/Gibbs sampling
3. Dimension reduction
▶ Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
▶ Alternating Least Squares (ALS)
4. Non-linear dimension reduction
▶ Multidimensional Scaling (MDS)
▶ Isomap
▶ Local Linear Embedding (LLE)
▶ Kernel PCA
▶ Autoencoders

--- Page 9 ---

Clustering

--- Page 10 ---

Clustering
Clustering: task of dividing up data into groups (clusters), so that points in any one group are more
“similar” to each other than to points outside the group Why cluster? Two main uses
▶ Summary: deriving a reduced representation of the full data set. E.g., vector quantization
(we’ll see this shortly)
▶ Discovery: looking for new insights into the structure of the data. E.g., finding groups of
students that commit similar mistakes, or groups of 80s songs that sound alike
▶ Helping with prediction, i.e., in classification or regression

--- Page 11 ---

Clustering
Inferred meaning of clusters: black – fastball, red – sinker, green – change up, blue – slider, light
blue – curveball

--- Page 12 ---

Clustering vs. Classification
In classification, we have data for which the groups are known, and we try to learn what
differentiates these groups (i.e., classification function) to properly classify future data
In clustering, we look at data for which groups are unknown and undefined,and try to learn the
groups themselves, as well as what differentiates them


--- Page 13 ---

Dissimilarity
Given observationsX1, . . . ,X n, and dissimilaritiesd(Xi,X j). (E.g., think ofXi ∈R p and
d(X i,X j)=∥X i −X j ∥2
2) LetKbe the number of clusters (fixed). A clustering of points,X1, . . . ,X n
is a functionCthat assigns each observationXi to a groupk∈ {1, . . . ,K}Notation:C(i)=k
means thatXi is assigned to groupk, andnkis the number of points in the groupk. Also, let
dij =d(X i,X j)The within-cluster scatter is defined as
W= 1
2
K∑︁
k=1
1
nk
∑︁
C(i)=k,C(j)=k
dij
SmallerWis better

--- Page 14 ---

K-means
TheK-means clustering algorithm approximately minimizes the enlarged criterion by alternately
minimizingoverCandc 1, . . . ,c K Westartwithaninitialguessforc 1, . . . ,c K (e.g.,pickKpointsat
random over the range ofX1, . . . ,X n), then repeat:
1. Minimize overC: for eachi=1, . . . ,n, find the cluster center
ck closest toXi, and letC(i)=k
2. Minimize overc1, . . . ,c K: for eachk=1, . . . ,K, letc k = ¯Xk,
the average of points in groupk
Stop when within-cluster variation doesn’t change In words:
1. Cluster (label) each point based on the closest center
2. Replace each center by the average of points in its cluster

--- Page 15 ---

K-means


--- Page 16 ---

K-means Properties
▶ Within-cluster variation decreases with each iteration of the algorithm. I.e., ifWt is the
within-cluster variation at iterationt, thenWt+1 ≤W t
▶ The algorithm always converges, no matter the initial cluster centers. In fact, it takes≤Kn
iterations
▶ The final clustering depends on the initial cluster centers. Sometimes, different initial centers
lead to very different final outputs. So we typically runK-means multiple times (e.g., 10
times), randomly initializing cluster centers for each run, then choose among from collection
of centers based on which one gives the smallest within-cluster variation
▶ The algorithm is not guaranteed to deliver the clustering that globally minimizes within-cluster
variation (recall: this would require looking through all possible assignments!)

--- Page 17 ---

K-means Example
HereX i ∈R 2,n=250, andK=4, the points are not as well-separated
These are results of running theK-means algorithm with different initial centers (chosen randomly
over the range of theXi’s).
We choose the second collection of centers because it yields the smallest within-cluster variation

--- Page 18 ---

Clustering as Compression
Left: original image; middle: using 23.9% of the storage; right: using 6.25% of the storage
K-means is often called “Lloyd’s algorithm” in computer science and engineering, and is used in
vector quantization for compression
Basic idea: runK-means clustering on4×4squares of pixels in an image, and keep only the
clusters and labels. SmallerKmeans more compression

--- Page 19 ---

K-medoids
In some applications we want each center to be one of the points itself. This is whereK-medoids
comes in—an algorithm similar to theK-means algorithm, except when fitting the centers
c1, . . . ,c K, we restrict our attention to the points themselves Initial guess for centersc1, . . . ,c K
(e.g., randomly selectKof the pointsX1, . . . ,X n), then repeat:
1. Minimize overC: for eachi=1, . . . ,n, find the cluster centerck closest toXi, and letC(i)=k
2. Minimize overc1, . . . ,c K: for eachk=1, . . . ,K, letc k =X ∗
k, themedoidof points in cluster
k, i.e., the pointXi in clusterkthat minimizes Í
C(j)=k ∥Xj −X i ∥2
2
Stop when within-cluster variation doesn’t change In words:
1. Cluster (label) each point based on the closest center
2. Replace each center by the medoid of points in its cluster

--- Page 20 ---

K-medoids


--- Page 21 ---

K-medoids Properties
▶ TheK-medoids algorithm shares the properties ofK-means that we discussed (each iteration
decreases the criterion; the algorithm always converges; different starts gives different final
answers; it does not achieve the global minimum)K-medoids generally returns a higher value
of
K∑︁
k=1
∑︁
C(i)=k
∥Xi −c k ∥2
2
than doesK-means (why?). Also,K-medoids is computationally harder thanK-means
(because of step 2: computing the medoid is harder than computing the average)
▶ Remember,K-medoids has the (potentially important) property that the centers are located
among the data points themselves

--- Page 22 ---

Hierarchical Clustering
Recall two properties ofK-means (K-medoids) clustering:
1. It fits exactlyKclusters (as specified)
2. Final clustering assignment depends on the chosen initial cluster centers
Given pairwise dissimilaritiesdij between data points, hierarchical clustering produces a consistent
result, without the need to choose initial starting positions (number of clusters) The catch: we need
to choose a way to measure the dissimilarity between groups, called the linkage Given the linkage,
hierarchical clustering produces a sequence of clustering assignments. At one end, all points are in
their own cluster, at the other end, all points are in one cluster

--- Page 23 ---

Hierarchical Clustering
Two types of hierarchical clustering algorithms:
Agglomerative (i.e., bottom-up):
▶ Start with all points in their own group
▶ Until there is only one cluster, repeatedly: merge the two groups that have the smallest
dissimilarity
Divisive (i.e., top-down):
▶ Start with all points in one cluster
▶ Until all points are in their own cluster, repeatedly: split the group into two resulting in the
biggest dissimilarity
Agglomerative strategies are simpler, we’ll focus on them. Divisive methods are still important, but
we won’t be able to cover them today

--- Page 24 ---

Hierarchical Clustering (Example)
Given these data points, an agglomerative algorithm might decide on a clustering sequence as
follows:


--- Page 25 ---

Hierarchical Clustering (Example)
Can represent this as a dendrogram (natural representation of the hierarchy)


--- Page 26 ---

Dendrograms
Dendrogram: convenient graphic to display a hierarchical sequence of clustering assignments. This
is simply a tree where:
▶ Each node represents a group
▶ Each leaf node is a singleton (i.e., a group containing a single data point)
▶ Root node is the group containing the whole data set
▶ Each internal node has two daughter nodes (children), representing the the groups that were
merged to form it
Remember: the choice of linkage determines how we measure dissimilarity between groups of
points
If we fix the leaf nodes at height zero, then each internal node is drawn at a height proportional to
the dissimilarity between its two daughter nodes

--- Page 27 ---

Linkages
Given pointsX1, . . . ,X n, and dissimilaritiesdij between each pairXi andX j. (Think ofXi ∈R p and
dij =∥X i −X j ∥2; note: this is distance, not squared distance)
At any level, clustering assignments can be expressed by setsG={i1,i 2, . . . ,i r }, giving indices of
points in this group. LetnG be the size ofG(herenG =r). Bottom level: each group looks like
G={i}, top level: only one group,G={1, . . . ,n}
Linkage: functiond(G,H)that takes two groupsG,Hand returns a dissimilarity score between
them
Agglomerative clustering, given the linkage:
▶ Start with all points in their own group
▶ Until there is only one cluster, repeatedly: merge the two groupsG,Hsuch thatd(G,H)is
smallest

--- Page 28 ---

Linkages
We’ll see the following linkages today:
1. Single linkage
2. Complete linkage
3. Average linkage
4. Centroid linkage
5. Minimax linkage

--- Page 29 ---

Single Linkage
In single linkage (i.e., nearest-neighbor linkage), the dissimilarity betweenG,His the smallest
dissimilarity between two points in opposite groups:
dsingle (G,H)=min
i∈G,j∈H
dij
Example (dissimilaritiesd ij are distances, groups
are marked by colors): single linkage score
dsingle (G,H)is the distance of the closest pair


--- Page 30 ---

Single Linkage
Heren=60,X i ∈R 2,d ij =∥X i −X j ∥2. Cutting the tree ath=0.9gives the clustering assignments
marked by colors
Cut interpretation: for each pointXi, there is another pointXj in its cluster withdij ≤0.9

--- Page 31 ---

Complete Linkage
In complete linkage (i.e., furthest-neighbor linkage), dissimilarity betweenG,His the largest
dissimilarity between two points in opposite groups:
dcomplete (G,H)=max
i∈G,j∈H
dij
Example (dissimilaritiesdij are distances, groups are
marked by colors): complete linkage score
dcomplete (G,H)is the distance of the furthest pair


--- Page 32 ---

Complete Linkage
Same data as before. Cutting the tree ath=5gives the clustering assignments marked by colors
Cut interpretation: for each pointXi, every other pointXj in its cluster satisfiesdij ≤5

--- Page 33 ---

Average Linkage
In average linkage, the dissimilarity betweenG,His the average dissimilarity over all points in
opposite groups:
daverage(G,H)= 1
nG ·n H
∑︁
i∈G,j∈H
dij
Example (dissimilaritiesdij are distances, groups are
marked by colors): average linkage scoredaverage(G,H)
is the average distance across all pairs
(Plot here only shows distances between the blue points
and one red point)


--- Page 34 ---

Average Linkage
Same data as before. Cutting the tree ath=1.5gives clustering assignments marked by the colors
Cut interpretation: there really isn’t a good one!

--- Page 35 ---

Shortcomings of Single & Complete Linkages
Single and complete linkage can have some practical problems:
▶ Single linkagesuffers from chaining. In order to merge two groups, only need one pair of
points to be close, irrespective of all others. Therefore clusters can be too spread out, and not
compact enough
▶ Complete linkageavoids chaining, but suffers from crowding. Because its score is based on
the worst-case dissimilarity between pairs, a point can be closer to points in other clusters than
to points in its own cluster. Clusters are compact, but not far enough apart
Average linkagetries to strike a balance. It uses average pairwise dissimilarity, so clusters tend to
be relatively compact and relatively far apart

--- Page 36 ---

Shortcoming of Single & Complete Linkages


--- Page 37 ---

Shortcomings of Average Linkage
Average linkage isn’t perfect, it has its own problems:
▶ It is not clear what properties the resulting clusters have when we cut an average linkage tree at
given heighth. Single and complete linkage trees each had simple interpretations
▶ Results of average linkage clustering can change with a monotone increasing transformation of
dissimilaritiesd ij. I.e., ifhis such thath(x) ≤h(y)wheneverx≤y, and we used
dissimilaritiesh(d ij)instead ofd ij, then we could get different answers
Depending on the context, second problem may be important or unimportant. E.g., it could be very
clear what dissimilarities should be used, or not
Note:results of single, complete linkage clustering are unchanged under monotone transformations

--- Page 38 ---

Shortcomings of Average Linkage


--- Page 39 ---

Centroid Linkage
Centroid linkage is commonly used. Assume thatXi ∈R p, anddij =∥X i −X j ∥2. Let ¯XG, ¯XH denote
group averages forG,H.
Then:
dcentroid (G,H)=∥ ¯XG − ¯XH ∥2
Example (dissimilaritiesdij are distances, groups are marked
by colors): centroid linkage scoredcentroid (G,H)is the
distance between the group centroids (i.e., group averages)


--- Page 40 ---

Centroid Linkage
Heren=60,X i ∈R 2,d ij =∥X i −X j ∥2. Cutting the tree at some heights wouldn’t make sense
...because the dendrogram has inversions! But we can, e.g., still look at output with 3 clusters
Cut interpretation: there isn’t one, even with no inversions

--- Page 41 ---

Shortcomings of Centroid Linkage
▶ Can produce dendrograms with inversions, which really messes up the visualization
▶ Even if we were lucky enough to have no inversions, still no interpretation for the clusters
resulting from cutting the tree
▶ Answers change with a monotone transformation of the dissimilarity measuredij =∥X i −X j ∥2.
E.g., changing todij =∥X i −X j ∥2
2 would give a different clustering


--- Page 42 ---

Minimax Linkage
Minimax linkage is a newcomer. First define radius of a group of pointsGaroundXi as
r(X i,G)=max
j∈G
dij
Then:
dminimax (G,H)=min
i∈G∪H
r(X i,G∪H)
Example (dissimilaritiesdij are distances, groups marked by
colors): minimax linkage scoredminimax (G,H)is the
smallest radius encompassing all points inGandH. The
centerX c is the black point


--- Page 43 ---

Minimax Linkage
Same data as before. Cutting the tree ath=2.5gives clustering assignments marked by the colors
Cut interpretation: each pointXi belongs to a cluster whose centerXc satisfiesd ic ≤2.5

--- Page 44 ---

Properties of Minimax Linkage
▶ Cutting a minimax tree at a heightha nice interpretation: each point is≤hin dissimilarity to
the center of its cluster.
▶ Produces dendrograms with no inversions
▶ Unchanged by monotone transformation of dissimilaritiesdij
▶ Producesclusterswhosecentersarechosenamongthedatapointsthemselves. Rememberthat,
depending on the application, this can be a very important property.
(HenceminimaxclusteringistheanalogytoK-medoidsintheworldofhierarchicalclustering)

--- Page 45 ---

Linkages summary
Note:this doesn’t tell us what “best linkage” is
What’s missing here: a detailed empirical comparison of how they perform. On top of this,
remember that choosing a linkage can be very situation dependent

--- Page 46 ---

Model-Based Methods

--- Page 47 ---

Mixture Models
▶ We explored the use ofK-meansandhierarchical clusteringfor clustering.
▶ These methods yieldhardassignments, strictly assigning observations to only one cluster.
▶ What aboutsoftassignments? Allow for someuncertaintyin the clustering results.
▶ Welcome to the wonderful world ofmixture models.


--- Page 48 ---

Mixture Models
We assume the distributionf(x)is amixtureofKcomponentdistributions:
f(x)=
K∑︁
k=1
𝜋kfk (x)
▶ 𝜋k:mixing proportions (or weights), where𝜋k >0and Í
k 𝜋k =1
This defines adata generating process, meaning to generate a new point:
1.Pick a distribution / componentamong ourKoptions, by introducing a new variable:
z∼Multinomial(𝜋 1, 𝜋2, . . . , 𝜋K )
i.e., a categorical variable indicating which group the new point is from.
2.Generate an observation with that distribution / component, i.e.,
x|z∼f z
So what do we use for eachfk?

--- Page 49 ---

Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs)
Assume aparametric mixture model, withparameters𝜃k for thekth component:
f(x)=
K∑︁
k=1
𝜋kfk (x;𝜃 k)
Assume each component isGaussian / Normal. In the 1D case:
fk (x;𝜃 k)=N(x;𝜇 k, 𝜎2
k )= 1√︃
2𝜋𝜎 2
k
exp
 
− (x−𝜇 k)2
2𝜎2
k
!
We need to estimate each of the following:
𝜋1, . . . , 𝜋K , 𝜇 1, . . . , 𝜇K , 𝜎 2
1 , . . . , 𝜎2
K

--- Page 50 ---

Let’s Pretend We Only Have One Component...
IfwehavenobservationsfromasingleNormaldistribution,weestimatethedistributionparameters
using thelikelihood function, the probability/density of observing the data given the parameters:
L (𝜇, 𝜎|x 1, . . . ,x n)=f(x 1, . . . ,x n |𝜇, 𝜎)=
nÖ
i=1
1√
2𝜋𝜎 2
exp

− (xi −𝜇) 2
2𝜎2

We can compute themaximum likelihood estimates (MLEs)for𝜇and𝜎. You already know these
values!
▶ ˆ𝜇MLE = 1
n
Ín
i=1 xi (sample mean)
▶ ˆ𝜎MLE =
√︃
1
n
Ín
i=1 (xi −𝜇) 2 (sample standard deviation, plug inˆ𝜇MLE)

--- Page 51 ---

The Problem with More Than One Component
▶ We don’t know which component an
observation belongs to.
▶ If we did know, we could compute each
component’s MLEs as before.
▶ But we don’t know becausezis alatent
variable! So what about its distribution
given the data?
P(z i =k|x i)= P(x i |z i =k)P(z i =k)
P(x i)
=
𝜋kN(𝜇 k, 𝜎2
k )
ÍK
k=1 𝜋kN(𝜇 k, 𝜎2
k )
▶ But we do NOT know these parameters!
▶ This leads to a very useful algorithm in
statistics...


--- Page 52 ---

Expectation-Maximization (EM) Algorithm
We alternate between the following steps:
▶ Pretendingto know the probability each observation belongs to each group, to estimate the
parameters of the components.
▶ Pretendingto know the parameters of the components, to estimate the probability each
observation belongs to each group.
This approach is reminiscent of the K-means algorithm.

--- Page 53 ---

Expectation-Maximization (EM) Algorithm
1. Initialization: Start with initial guesses for the parameters:
▶ Mixing proportions:𝜋 1, . . . , 𝜋K
▶ Means:𝜇 1, . . . , 𝜇K
▶ Variances:𝜎 2
1 , . . . , 𝜎2
K
2. Repeat until convergence:
▶ Expectation (E) step:
ˆzik =
𝜋k ·N(x i;𝜇 k, 𝜎2
k )
ÍK
j=1 𝜋j ·N(x i;𝜇 j, 𝜎2
j )
▶ Maximization (M) step:
𝜇k =
Ín
i=1 ˆzikxi
Ín
i=1 ˆzik
, 𝜎 2
k =
Ín
i=1 ˆzik (xi −𝜇 k)2
Ín
i=1 ˆzik
, 𝜋 k = 1
n
n∑︁
i=1
ˆzik
We’ve already seen this pattern (K-means, IPCA), we’ll continue to see it in the future.

--- Page 54 ---

How Does This Relate Back to Clustering?
From the EM algorithm:
▶ ˆzik is asoft membershipof observationiin clusterk.
▶ You can assign observationito a cluster with the largestˆzik.
▶ Measure cluster assignmentuncertainty:1−max k ˆzik.
Our parameters determine the type of clusters:
▶ In 1D, we have two options:
1. Each cluster hasequal variance(spread):𝜎 2
1 =𝜎 2
2 =· · ·=𝜎 2
K.
2. Each cluster is allowed to have adifferent variance.
▶ But that is only 1D... what happens in multiple dimensions?

--- Page 55 ---

Multivariate Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs)
Assume a parametric mixture model with parameters𝜃k for thekth component:
f(x)=
K∑︁
k=1
𝜋kfk (x;𝜃 k)
wheref k (x;𝜃 k) ∼N(µ k,𝚺 k).
Each component is a multivariate normal distribution:
▶ µk: vector of means inpdimensions
▶ 𝚺k:p×pcovariance matrix, describing the joint variability between pairs of variables
Covariance matrix example:
𝚺=

𝜎2
1 𝜎1,2 · · ·𝜎 1,p
𝜎2,1 𝜎2
2 · · ·𝜎 2,p
... ... . . . ...
𝜎p,1 𝜎p,2 · · ·𝜎 2
p


--- Page 56 ---

Multivariate Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs)


--- Page 57 ---

Covariance Constraints
▶ As we increase the number of dimensions, model fitting and estimation become increasingly
difficult.
▶ We can useconstraintson multiple aspects of thekcovariance matrices:
▶ Volume: size of the clusters, i.e., number of observations.
▶ Shape: direction of variance, i.e., which variables display more variance.
▶ Orientation: aligned with axes (low covariance) versus tilted (due to relationships between
variables).

--- Page 58 ---

K-Means & GMM
▶ It’s worth noting that there is a deep link between K-means and GMM
(K-means is a special case of GMM):
▶ All prior class proportions are 1/K
▶ Equal volume, only circles (Σ =𝜎2I)
▶ All posterior probabilities are either 0 or 1

--- Page 59 ---

Topic Models


--- Page 60 ---

Topic Models
Motivating questions:
▶ What are the topics that a document is about?
▶ Given one document, can we find other documents about the same topics?
▶ How do topics in a field change over time?
A hierarchical Bayesian approach:
▶ Assume each document defines a distribution over(hidden) topics.
▶ Assume each topic defines a distribution overwords.
▶ The posterior probability of these latent variables given a document collection determines a
hidden decomposition of the collection into topics.

--- Page 61 ---

Setting Up a Generative Model
▶ We haveDdocuments using a vocabulary ofVword types.
▶ Each document contains up toNword tokens.
▶ We assumeKtopics.
▶ Each document has aK-dimensional multinomial𝜃d over topics with a common Dirichlet
prior Dir(𝛼).
▶ Each topic has aV-dimensional multinomial𝜙k over words with a common symmetric
Dirichlet prior Dir(𝛽).

--- Page 62 ---

The Generative Process
For each topick=1, . . . ,K:
▶ Draw a multinomial over words:𝜙k ∼Dir(𝛽)
For each documentd=1, . . . ,D:
▶ Draw a multinomial over topics:𝜃d ∼Dir(𝛼)
▶ For each wordwd,n in the document:
▶ Draw a topic assignment:zd,n ∼Multinomial(𝜃 d )
▶ Draw a word:wd,n ∼Multinomial(𝜙 zd,n )

--- Page 63 ---

The Generative Process


--- Page 64 ---

The Generative Process


--- Page 65 ---

The Generative Process


--- Page 66 ---

A Geometric Interpretation


--- Page 67 ---

The Inference Problem
What is the posterior of the hidden variables given the observed variables (and hyperparameters)?
Problem:The integral in the denominator is intractable!
Solutions:Approximate inference
▶ Gibbs sampling (Griffiths & Steyvers)
▶ Variational Inference (Blei et al.)

--- Page 68 ---

Gibbs Sampling
▶ Gibbs sampling is much easier to understand (and often works better than variational
inference...)
▶ Represent the corpus as a matrix consisting of 3 columns
▶ word assignments (i.e. which word in the vocab is this particular realization assigned to),wi
▶ documnet assignments (i.e. which document is this particular realization assigned to),di
▶ topic assignments (i.e. which topic is this particular realization assigned to),zi
▶ Words and documents are observed, but topics are latent and we need to estimate...
▶ Gibbs sampling iterates through this matrix samplingzis

--- Page 69 ---

Gibbs Sampling
The probabilityP(z i =j|z −i ,w,d)is proportional to the probability ofwi under topicjtimes the
probability of topicjgiven documentdi.
Definen −i,j (wi)as freq. ofw i labeled as topicj.
Definen −i,j (di)as number of words indi labeled as topicj.
P(z i =j|z −i ,w,d) ∝
n−i,j (wi) +𝜂
V𝜂+ ÍV
v=1 n−i,j (wv )
|                     {z                     }
Prob ofwi under topiczi
n−i,j (di) +𝛼
K𝛼+ ÍK
k=1 n−i,j (di)
|                    {z                    }
Prob of topiczi in documentdi

--- Page 70 ---

What Other Quantities do we Need?
As Bayesians, we want to compute the expected value of the parameters given the observed data.
Our data is the set of wordsw1:D,1:N.
Hence, we need to computeE[. . .|w1:D,1:N ]
The topic probabilityof the wordvaccording to topick:
⟨𝛽k,v ⟩=E[𝛽 k,v |w 1:D,1:N ]
The topic proportions of each documentd:
⟨𝜃d,k ⟩=E[𝜃 d,k |w 1:D,1:N ]
The topic assignment of each wordwd,n:
⟨zd,n,k ⟩=E[Z d,n =k|w 1:D,1:N ]

--- Page 71 ---

What Other Quantities do we Need?
From any single sample, we can estimate:
The topic probabilityof the wordvaccording to topick:
⟨𝛽k,v ⟩=E[𝛽 k,v |w 1:D,1:N ]
The topic proportions of each documentd:
⟨𝜃d,k ⟩=E[𝜃 d,k |w 1:D,1:N ]
⟨𝛽k,i ⟩=
nj (wi) +𝜂
V𝜂+ ÍV
v=1 nj (wv )
⟨𝜃d,k ⟩=
nj (di) +𝛼
K𝛼+ ÍK
k=1 nj (di)

--- Page 72 ---

Author Topic Model
Can allow latent topics to vary with authors (Rosen-Zvi et al, 2012)...


--- Page 73 ---

Dynamic Topic Model
Can allow latent topics to evolve over time (Blei & Lafferty, 2006)...


--- Page 74 ---

Dimension Reduction

--- Page 75 ---

Clustering & Dimension Reduction
▶ We’ve thought about clustering observations, given features. But in many situations, we can
actually cluster the observations or the features or both. g.g.,
▶ (From Makretsov et al. (2004), “Hierarchical clustering analysis of tissue microarray immunostaining
data identifies prognostically significant groups of breast carcinoma”)
▶ If we cluster the features usingK-means or hierarchical clustering, then we could replace the features by
cluster centers. This would reduce the dimension of our feature space

--- Page 76 ---

What is Dimension Reduction?
▶ Dimension reduction: the task of transforming our data set to one with less features. A new
feature can be one of the old features, or it can be a some linear or nonlinear combination of
old features.
We want this transformation to preserve the main structure that is present in the feature space.
▶ This is a broader goal than that of clustering. It is often the first step in an analysis, to be
followed by, e.g., visualization, clustering, regression, classification.
▶ We’re going to start with linear dimension reduction. This means: looking for straight lines in
the feature space along which the data exhibit an interesting trend.
▶ Specifically, we’re going to interpret “interesting” to mean high variance.

--- Page 77 ---

Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
▶ Principal component analysis (PCA) is nearly as old as statistics itself. Because it has been
widely studied, you will hear it being called different things in different fields.
▶ WearegivenadatamatrixX∈R n×p, meaningthatwehavenobservations(rowvectors)andp
features (column vectors). We assume that the columns ofXhave been centered. (Is this going
to change the structure that we’re interested in?)


--- Page 78 ---

First PC
The first principal component direction ofXis the unit vectorv1 ∈R p that maximizes the sample
variance ofXv1 ∈R n when compared to all other unit vectors.
For anyv∈R p, the vectorXv∈R n has sample mean zero and sample variance
1
n (Xv) T (Xv)(recall that we column centeredX).
Hence the first principal component directionv1 ∈R p is
v1 =arg max
∥v∥ 2=1
(Xv) T (Xv)
The vectorXv1 ∈R n is called the first principal component ofX, andu1 =(Xv 1)/d1 ∈R n is the
normalized first principal component. Hered1 =
√︁
(Xv1)T (Xv1), andd 2
1 /nis the amount of
variance explained byv1.

--- Page 79 ---

What’s Next?
What happens next? The idea is to successively find orthogonal directions of the highest variance.
Why orthogonal? Because we’ve already explained the variance inXalongv1, and now we want to
look at variance in a different direction. Any direction not orthogonal tov1 would necessarily have
some overlap withv1, i.e., it would create some redundancy in explaining the variance inX.

--- Page 80 ---

Second PC
Given the first principal component directionv1 ∈R p, we define the second principal component
directionv 2 ∈R p to be the unit vector, withvT
2 v1 =0, that makesXv2 ∈R n have maximal sample
variance over all unit vectors orthogonal tov1. This is
v2 =arg max
∥v∥ 2=1
v T v1=0
(Xv) T (Xv)
The vectorXv2 ∈R n is called the second principal component ofX, andu2 =(Xv 2)/d2 ∈R n is the
normalized second principal component. Hered2 =
√︁
(Xv2)T (Xv2), andd 2
2 /nis the amount of
variance explained byv2.

--- Page 81 ---

Further PCs
Giventhek−1principalcomponentdirectionsv 1, . . . ,v k−1 ∈R p (notethat theseareorthonormal),
we define thekth principal component directionvk ∈R p to be
vk =arg max
∥v∥ 2=1
v T vj =0,j=1,...,k−1
(Xv) T (Xv)
The vectorXvk ∈R n is called thekth principal component ofX, anduk =(Xv k)/dk ∈R n is the
normalizedkth principal component. Heredk =
√︁
(Xvk)T (Xvk), andd 2
k /nis the amount of
variance explained byvk.

--- Page 82 ---

Example
Example:X∈R 2000×3. Shown are the three principal component directionsv1,v 2,v 3 ∈R 3, and
the scores from projecting onto the first two directions.


--- Page 83 ---

Example
Same example:X∈R 2000×3,v 1,v 2, . . . ,v 3 ∈R 3. What happens if we replaceXby its projection
ontov 1? Ontov 1,v 2? Ontov 1,v 2,v 3?
The third plot looks exactly the same as the original data. Is this a coincidence? No! (Why?)

--- Page 84 ---

Dimension Reduction via PCA
As we’ve seen, dimension reduction via principal component analysis can be achieved by taking the
firstkprincipal component scoresXv 1, . . . ,Xv k ∈R n
We can think ofXv1, . . . ,Xv k as our new feature vectors, which is a big savings ifk≪p(e.g.k=2
or3)
An important question: how good are these features at capturing the structure of our old features?
How good are they, for a fixedk?

--- Page 85 ---

Approximation by Projection
As for the first question, think about approximatingXbyXVkV T
k , the projection ofXonto the firstk
principal component directions
An important alternate characterization of the principal component directions: given centered
X∈R n×p, ifVk =[v 1 . . .v k] ∈R p×k is the matrix whose columns contain the firstkprincipal
component directions ofX, then
XVkV T
k =arg min
rank(A)=k
∥X−A∥ 2
F =arg min
rank(A)=k
n∑︁
i=1
p∑︁
j=1
(Xij −A ij)2
In other words,XVkV T
k is the best rankkapproximation toX

--- Page 86 ---

Estimating PCA
XVkV T
k =arg min
rank(A)=k
∥X−A∥ 2
F =arg min
rank(A)=k
n∑︁
i=1
p∑︁
j=1
(Xij −A ij)2
There are three ways to solve this estimation problem:
▶ Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
▶ Alternating Least Squares (ALS)
▶ Multidimensional Scaling (MDS)

--- Page 87 ---

Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
There are various ways to compute principal component directions.
We’ll consider computation via the singular value decomposition (SVD) ofX:
X|{z}
n×p
=U|{z}
n×p
D|{z}
p×p
V T
|{z}
p×p
HereD=diag(d 1, . . . ,d p)is diagonal withd1 ≥. . .≥d p ≥0, andU,Vboth have orthonormal
columns. This gives us everything:
▶ columns ofV,v 1, . . . ,v p ∈R p, are the principal component directions
▶ columns ofU,u 1, . . . ,u p ∈R n, are the normalized principal component scores
▶ squaring thejth diagonal element ofDand dividing byn,d2
j /n, gives the variance explained
byv j
(Don’t forget that we must first center the columns ofX!)

--- Page 88 ---

Matrix Decomposition
▶ What if some values ofXare missing?
▶ We can still estimateA, write as a product of two matrices (L,R):
ˆL, ˆR=arg min
L,R
∑︁
i,j|X ij observed
(Xij −L i Rj)2
▶ Can do this whenXisn’t missing values too!


--- Page 89 ---

Matrix Decomposition


--- Page 90 ---

Alternating Least Squares (ALS)
ˆL, ˆR=arg min
L,R
∑︁
i,j|X ij observed
(Xij −L i Rj)2
▶ How to solve this optimization problem?
▶ Randomly initializeLandR, then iterate between the following two steps:
1. Conditional onR, solve forL:
min
Li
∑︁
j|X ij observed
(Xij −L i Rj )2
2. Conditional onL, solve forR:
min
Rj
∑︁
i|X ij observed
(Xij −L i Rj )2
▶ This isalternating least squares (ALS)
▶ Also an expectation maximization (EM) algorithm under certain distributional assumptions

--- Page 91 ---

Instrumented Principal Components Analysis (IPCA)
Recall from last week the estimator for IPCA:
min
Γ,F
1
NT
∑︁
t
(Rt −𝛽 t−1 Ft)′ (Rt −𝛽 t−1 Ft)subject to𝛽 t−1 =Z t−1 Γ
First-order conditions (FOCs):
Ft =(𝛽 ′
t−1 𝛽t−1 ) −1 𝛽′
t−1 Rt
vec(Γ ′)=
 ∑︁
t
[Zt−1 ⊗F ′
t ]′ [Zt−1 ⊗F ′
t ]
! −1  ∑︁
t
[Zt−1 ⊗F ′
t ]′Rt
!
▶ Iterate until convergence
▶ This is alternating least squares...

--- Page 92 ---

Penalized ALS!
▶ One benefit of ALS is that we can add a penalty term to each least squares step...
▶ An alternative ALS procedure:
1. Conditional onR, solve forL:
min
Li
∑︁
j|X ij observed
(Xij −L i Rj )2 +𝜆 L||L i || 2
2. Conditional onL, solve forR:
min
Rj
∑︁
i|X ij observed
(Xij −L i Rj )2 +𝜆 R ||R j || 2

--- Page 93 ---

K-Means & PCA
▶ There is a close link between PCA and the earlier clustering methods we saw (e.g. K-means)
▶ K-Means Clustering via Principal Components AnalysisDing and He, 2004.
▶ Shows that K-means solves the same optimization problem as PCA with additional constraints


--- Page 94 ---

Non-Linear Dimension Reduction

--- Page 95 ---

The Inner-Product Matrix
GivenX∈R n×p, the matrixXXT ∈R n×n is the inner-product matrix. IfXhasith rowxi ∈R p, then
(XX T )ij =x T
i xj
Suppose that we wanted the principal component scores ofX, but we only hadXXT. Could we still
compute them?
Yes! Using the singular value decompositionX=UDVT, we have
XX T =UD 2UT
This is called an eigendecomposition ofXXT because the columns ofUare eigenvectors ofXXT.
(Check?)
Hence we can compute the eigendecomposition or “factorize” the inner product matrixXXT, and
then the scores are given by the columns ofUD, i.e.,dj uj,j=1, . . . ,p

--- Page 96 ---

Low-Dim Representation from Distances Only
Suppose that instead of measuringX∈Rn×p directly, we only measured the distances between pairs
of observations,
Δij =∥x i −x j ∥2,i,j=1, . . . ,n
This gives us a distance matrixΔ∈Rn×n
We want a lower-dimensional representationz1, . . . ,z n ∈R k, for some smallk(e.g.k=2or3),
such that∥z i −z j ∥2 ≈Δ ij, for everyi,j=1, . . . ,n
We saw that the principal component scores do exactly this, but these rely onXorXXT, which we
don’t have here. We can only use the distancesΔij
Is this possible?

--- Page 97 ---

Multidimensional Scaling (MDS)
Assume thatX∈R n×p has been column centered (this is enough to deal with translation
unidentifiability)
Multidimensional scaling (MDS): given distance matrixΔ∈Rn×n, we
1. Recover the inner-product matrixB=XXT ∈R n×n
2. FactorizeBto get the firstkprincipal component scores
(Called classical multidimensional scaling, there are other flavors,
e.g., least squares multidimensional scaling)
We’ve already seen how to do step 2: remember that we compute
the eigendecompositionB=UD 2UT and then the firstkprincipal component scores are the firstk
columns ofUD
So, how do we do step 1, i.e., how do we recoverB?

--- Page 98 ---

Recovering Inner-Products from Distances
The following procedure can be used to recover the inner-productsB=XXT fromΔ:
1. ComputeA ij =− 1
2 Δ2
ij to form the matrixA∈R n×n
2. Double centerA—i.e., center both the columns and rows ofA—to recover the matrix
B∈R n×n. Note that this is the same as:
B=(I−M)A(I−M)
whereM= 1
n 11T ∈R n×n

--- Page 99 ---

Example: Donut Data
Recall donut example:X∈R 2000×3. The left plot showsXand the right plot shows the
multidimensional scaling representationZ∈R 2000×3 computed from the distance matrix
Δ∈R 2000×2000
The multidimensional scaling recovery is the same as the principal component scores
UD∈R 2000×3. This is the same asXup to an orthonormal transformation—recall thatUD=XV

--- Page 100 ---

Beyond Euclidean Distance
If theΔij were actual Euclidean distances between the rows of a centered matrixX∈Rn×p, we get
back the firstkprincipal component scores exactly. Importantly, multidimensional scaling can be
applied to anyΔij, not just Euclidean distances
There is a class of methods which construct a fancier metricΔij between high-dimensional points
x1, . . . ,x n ∈R p, and then they feed theseΔij through multidimensional scaling to get a
low-dimensional representationz1, . . . ,z n ∈R k. In this case, we don’t just get principal component
scores, and our low-dimensional representation can end up being a nonlinear function of the data
Why would we want to use non-
Euclidean distances?


--- Page 101 ---

Tangent Distance
Tangentdistanceisanexampleofafanciermetricthatwecanrunthroughmultidimensionalscaling
(though used elsewhere too)
A motivating example is the digit data. Here, we have16×16images, treated as pointsxi ∈R 256
(i.e., they are unraveled into vectors). If we take, e.g., a “3” and rotate it through a small angle, we
would like for the rotated image to be considered close to the original image. This is not necessarily
true of Euclidean distance
We could defineΔrotation
ij to be the shortest Euclidean distance between a rotated version ofxi and
rotated version ofxj. What’s the problem with this? (Hint: think about rotating a “6”)

--- Page 102 ---

Tangent Distance


--- Page 103 ---

Tangent Distance


--- Page 104 ---

Example: Handwritten Digits
Example:n=1220images of handwritten digits andp=256, i.e., each image is16×16pixels.
Left plot: first two multidimensional scaling dimensions using Euclidean distances (principal
component directions), right plot: using tangent distances


--- Page 105 ---

Isometric Feature Mapping
Isometric feature mapping (Isomap) learns structure in a more general setting to define distances.
The basic idea is to construct a graphG=(V,E), i.e., construct edgesEbetween vertices
V={1, . . . ,n}, based on the structure betweenx1, . . . ,x n ∈R p.
Then we define a graph distanceΔIsomap
ij betweeniandj, and use multidimensional scaling for our
low-dimensional representation


--- Page 106 ---

The Isomap Graph Distances
Constructing the graph: for each pairi,j, we connecti,jwith an edge if either:
▶ xi is one ofxj’smnearest neighbors, or
▶ xj is one ofxi’smnearest neighbors
The weight of this edgee={i,j}is thenw e =∥x i −x j ∥2
Defining graph distances: now that we have built a graph, i.e., we have built an edge setE, we
define the graph distanceΔIsomap
ij betweenx i andx j to be the shortest path in our graph fromitoj:
ΔIsomap
ij =min
pathsP⊆Efromitoj
∑︁
e∈P
we
(This can be computed by, e.g., Dijkstra’s algorithm or Floyd’s algorithm)

--- Page 107 ---

Example: Hand Positions
Example:n=3000images of hands andp=4096, i.e., each image is64×64pixels. Isomap
applied withm=6nearest neighbors, reduced tok=2dimensions:


--- Page 108 ---

Local Linear Embedding
Local linear embedding (LLE) is a similar method in spirit but its details are very different. It
doesn’t use multidimensional scaling
The basic idea has two steps:
1. Learn a bunch of local approximations to the structure betweenx1, . . . ,x n ∈R p
2. Learn a low-dimensional representationz1, . . . ,z n ∈R k that best matches these local
approximations
What is meant by such local approximations? We simply try to predict eachxi by a linear function
of nearby pointsxj (hence the namelocal linear embedding)

--- Page 109 ---

Local Linear Embedding
For eachxi ∈R p, we first find itsmnearest neighbors, and collect their indices asN (i). Then we
build a weight vectorwi ∈R n, settingwij =0forj∉N (i)and fittingw ij forj∈ N (i)by minimizing

xi −
∑︁
j∈ N (i)
wij xj

2
2
Finally, we take these weightsw1, . . . ,w n ∈R n and we fit the low-dimensional representation
z1, . . . ,z n ∈R k, by minimizing
n∑︁
i=1

zi −
n∑︁
j=1
wij zj

2
2

--- Page 110 ---

Local Linear Embedding


--- Page 111 ---

Example: facial expressions
Example:n=2000images of faces andp=560, i.e., each image is20×28pixels. Local linear
embedding applied withm=12nearest neighbors, reduced tok=2dimensions:
(From Roweis et al. (2000))

--- Page 112 ---

Kernel PCA
▶ Recall from lecture 1: by projecting our original features into a higher dimensional space can
deal with non-linearities
▶ Kernel functionis the inner product in some feature space:
K(x i,x j)=𝜙(x i)T 𝜙(x j)


--- Page 113 ---

Isomap & LLE as Kernel PCA
▶ The same idea can be applied to PCA...
ReplaceXX T with kernel version
▶ A kernel view of dimensionality reduction of
manifoldsHam et al., 2004
▶ Shows that Isomap, LLE, and Laplacian
Eigenmaps can be written as kernel PCA
with specific Gram matrices (distance
matrix)


--- Page 114 ---

Autoencoders

--- Page 115 ---

Autoencoder Basics
▶ An autoencoder is a special type of feed
forward neural network which does the
following
▶ Encodes its inputxi into a hidden
representationh
▶ Decodes the input again from this hidden
representation
▶ The model is trained to minimize a certain
loss function which will ensure thatˆxi is
close toxi

--- Page 116 ---

Autoencoder Basics
▶ Let us consider the case where
dim(h)<dim(x i)
▶ If we are still able to reconstructˆxi perfectly
fromh, then what does it say abouth?
▶ his a loss-free encoding ofxi. It captures all
the important characteristics ofxi
▶ Do you see an analogy with PCA...

--- Page 117 ---

Autoencoder Basics
▶ Consider the case when the inputs are real
valued
▶ The objective of the autoencoder is to
reconstruct ˆxi to be as close toxi as possible
▶ This can be formalized using the following
objective function:
min
W,W ∗,c,b
1
m
m∑︁
i=1
n∑︁
j=1
(ˆxij −x ij)2
i.e.,
min
W,W ∗,c,b
1
m
m∑︁
i=1
(ˆxi −x i)T (ˆxi −x i)
▶ We can then train the autoencoder just like a
regular feedforward network using
back-propagation

--- Page 118 ---

Autoencoders and PCA
▶ The encoder part of an autoencoder is
equivalent to PCA if we
▶ use a linear encoder
▶ use a linear decoder
▶ use squared error loss function
▶ normalize the inputs to
ˆxij = 1√
m
 
xij − 1
m
m∑︁
k=1
xkj
!

--- Page 119 ---

Autoencoders and PCA
PCA Autoencoder


--- Page 120 ---

Regularization in Autoencoders
▶ While poor generalization could happen
even in undercomplete autoencoders, it is an
even more serious problem for overcomplete
autoencoders
▶ Here, (as stated earlier) the model can
simply learn to copyxi tohand thenhto ˆxi
▶ To avoid poor generalization, we need to
introduce regularization

--- Page 121 ---

L2 Regularization in Autoencoders
▶ The simplest solution is to add a
L2-regularization term to the objective
function
min
𝜃 ,W,W ∗,b,c
1
m
m∑︁
i=1
n∑︁
j=1
(ˆxij −x ij)2 +𝜆∥𝜃∥ 2
▶ This is very easy to implement and just adds
a term𝜆Wto the gradient 𝜕L (𝜃)
𝜕W (and
similarly for other parameters)

--- Page 122 ---

Denoising Autoencoders
▶ Can train an autoencoder to learn todenoiseinput by giving inputcorruptedinstance˜xand
targetinguncorruptedinstancex
▶ Example noise models:
▶ Gaussian noise: ˜x=x+z, wherez∼ N (0, 𝜎 2I)
▶ Masking noise: zero out some fraction𝜈of components ofx
▶ Salt-and-pepper noise: choose some fraction𝜈of components ofxand set each to its min or max
value (equally likely)
▶ Why?Now your autoencoder can learn underlying structure even if the out-of-sample data is
noisy

--- Page 123 ---

Denoising Autoencoders


--- Page 124 ---

Denoising Autoencoders


--- Page 125 ---

Denoising Autoencoders
▶ How does it work?
▶ Even though, e.g., MNIST data are in a 784-dimensional space, they lie on a low-dimensional
manifoldthat captures their most important features
▶ Corruption process moves instancexoff of manifold
▶ Encoderf 𝜃 and decoderg𝜃 ′ are trained to project˜xback onto manifold


--- Page 126 ---

Semi-Supervised Learning
▶ Can re-use autoencoders for downstream tasks (e.g. forecasting)


--- Page 127 ---

Transfer Learning
▶ Similarly, can use “off-the-shelf” autoencoders and then specialize them to a specific task


--- Page 128 ---

Variational Autoencoders
▶ VAE is an autoencoder that is also a generative model
⇒Can generate new instances according to a probability distribution
▶ E.g., hidden Markov models, Bayesian networks
▶ Contrast withdiscriminative models, which predict classifications
▶ Encoderfoutputs[𝜇, 𝜎] T
▶ Pair(𝜇 i , 𝜎i )parameterizes Gaussian distribution for dimensioni=1, . . . ,n
▶ Drawz i ∼ N (𝜇 i , 𝜎i )
▶ Decode thislatent variablezto getg(z)


--- Page 129 ---

Variational Autoencoders


--- Page 130 ---

Variational Autoencoders
▶ Maximum likelihood(ML) approach for training generative models: find a model (𝜃) with
maximum probability of generating the training setX
▶ Achieve this by minimizing the sum of:
▶ End-to-end AE loss (e.g., square, cross-entropy)
▶ Regularizermeasuring distance (K-L divergence) from latent distributionq(z|x)andN (0,I)(=
standard multivariate Gaussian)
▶ N (0,I)also considered theprior distributionoverz(= distribution when noxis known)